Share Market - A Guide to Share Market Basics Online | Angel One
Calculate your SIP Return
Open Demat Account
Stocks
Knowledge Center
Blogs
Reports
Podcasts
Related Search
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Popular Stocks
SBI Share Price
Adani Enterprises Share Price
Reliance Share Price
Mazagon Dock Share Price
ITC Share Price
HDFC Bank Share Price
Infosys Share Price
Adani Ports Share Price
TCS Share Price
Tata Motors Share Price
Stocks
Knowledge Center
Blogs
Reports
Podcasts
Related Search
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Please Wait...
Popular Stocks
SBI Share Price
Adani Enterprises Share Price
Reliance Share Price
Mazagon Dock Share Price
ITC Share Price
HDFC Bank Share Price
Infosys Share Price
Adani Ports Share Price
TCS Share Price
Tata Motors Share Price
Open Demat Account
Open Demat Account
Login
Open Demat Account
Open Demat Account
Login
Trade & Invest
Stocks
Indices
NFO
ETF
Commodity
Upcoming IPO
F&O
Mutual Funds & SIP
SIP Calculator
Mutual Funds
AMCs
Types of Mutual Fund
Mutual Fund Screener
Learn
Live Blog
Knowledge Center
Smart Money
Finance Wiki
News
Products
Angel One Super App
Angel One Trade
Smart API
Become a Partner
Authorised Person
Mutual Fund Distributor
Authorised Person Locator
Pricing
Support
User Manual
Read FAQs
Contact Us
Download App
Home
›
Knowledge Center
›
Share Market
Share Market
5 mins read
by
Angel One
The Indian share market comprises NSE and BSE – both which are active. Start online
share
trading by referring to the
share market tips and trading techniques
shared by us, and experience profits like never before.
Learn Share Market - Detailed Stock Market Guide For Beginners
How Does Stock Market Work?
The Benefits of Investing in Stocks
How to Invest in Share Market? Buy Stocks (Beginners) - Angel One
Share Market Investment Tips and Ideas
How to Trade in Indian Share Market
Why Do People Buy Shares?
What Is Equity?
What are Equity Derivatives?
Investment Opportunities in Indian Stock Market
Figuring Financial Reports
The Difference Between Large-Cap, Mid-Cap And Small-Cap Stocks
What Is Stock Split
Support And Resistance
Tips for choosing best stock broker for beginners
What is Open Interest
What is Volume in Share Market
What is Stop Loss
What is MCX?
What is IOC in Share Market
How to Learn Share Market Trading
How to Earn Money Every Day in the Share Market
Why the Share Market is Down and What you Should Do
How to earn 1 lakh per month from share market
Load More
Things You May Also Like to Know
NSE Top Gainer
NSE Top Loser
BSE Top Gainer
BSE Top Loser
52 Weeks High
52 Weeks Low
FAQs
What is meant by equity market?
In simple terms, an equity market is a market used for trading equity instruments. Through an equity market, shares are traded either through stock exchange or over-the-counter markets. It offers two-way benefits to companies and investors. Companies get an opportunity to raise required capital without incurring debt. Investors can earn profits through these company shares. They also have a claim on the future earnings of the company. Equity markets act as a buying and selling avenue of stocks. It is a meeting point for companies and investors. The equities traded in the equity market can either be public stocks or private stocks, Public stocks are those stocks which are listed on a stock exchange, like NSE or BSE. Private stocks are traded through over-the-counter market, or through dealers.
Who is a stock trader?
Simply put, a stock trader is an investor who trades stock in the financial markets with the aim of earning profits on those investments. Stock traders may be investors as a full-time profession or can partake in the practice casually. They may be a hedger, investor, speculator or an arbitrageur. Stock traders trade financial instruments like mutual funds, shares, equity, pension funds, etc. In order to be a successful stock trader, you must have a profitable investment strategy in place. Some use the buy and hold strategy, where bought stocks are held for a longer term for higher profits. Various stock traders have different investment strategies based on their financial goals.
What is a stock exchange?
A stock exchange is a financial market where buy and sell transactions of securities takes place. These buy and sell prices are determined by market forces like demand and supply. A stock exchange helps investors to trade through a convenient and secured platform. The Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) is the oldest stock exchange in India. Currently, the National Stock Exchange (NSE) is the leading stock exchange of the country and is located in Mumbai. You can buy and sell securities like shares, debentures, bonds, etc. through a stock exchange. It requires registration by the Central Government. Trading securities is governed by rules and regulations of the stock exchange and SEBI (Securities and Exchange Board of India) guidelines. SEBI is the regulator for the securities market in India.
How much is the minimum amount for investing in share market?
A stock exchange is a financial market where buy and sell transactions of securities takes place. These buy and sell prices are determined by market forces like demand and supply. A stock exchange helps investors to trade through a convenient and secured platform. The Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) is the oldest stock exchange in India. Currently, the National Stock Exchange (NSE) is the leading stock exchange of the country and is located in Mumbai. There is no minimum amount required for share market investment. You can buy a single share or any number of shares you like. In order to trade in shares, you have to open a demat account with a depository participant. A trading account has to be opened as well, with your stockbroker. You can begin trading shares once these accounts have been opened. Shares offer you income through dividends. Hence, it acts as an annual income and as a reward for shareholders. The higher the profitability of the company, the higher its dividend rate is. People also buy shares to have a stake in companies which are likely to perform well, thus giving them a sense of ownership. It also helps to create a diverse investment portfolio. Buying shares also allows easy access to your money as you can easily buy and trade shares without having to cough up a penalty.
How is the market qualified as bull or bear?
A stock exchange is a financial market where buy and sell transactions of securities takes place. These buy and sell prices are determined by market forces like demand and supply. A stock exchange helps investors to trade through a convenient and secured platform. The Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) is the oldest stock exchange in India. Currently, the National Stock Exchange (NSE) is the leading stock exchange of the country and is located in Mumbai. There is no minimum amount required for share market investment. You can buy a single share or any number of shares you like. In order to trade in shares, you have to open a demat account with a depository participant. A trading account has to be opened as well, with your stockbroker. You can begin trading shares once these accounts have been opened. Shares offer you income through dividends. Hence, it acts as an annual income and as a reward for shareholders. The higher the profitability of the company, the higher its dividend rate is. The market is known as a bull market if stocks are rising, GDP is increasing and there are many job opportunities. During this time, investors are of the belief that the upward trend will continue in the near future. It is characterized by high levels of optimism and investor confidence. Bear market, on the other hand, means that stock prices are falling and the economy is on verge of a recession. At this time, when share prices are falling, most investors sell their shares to avoid added losses. It becomes difficult to earn stellar gains during this time unless the investor is a short seller.
Read more
Open Free Demat Account!
Join our 3 Cr+ happy customers
+91
Want to open an NRI account?
Top Stocks
RELIANCE
Reliance Industries Ltd
₹1,410.40
16.80
(1.21%)
INFY
Infosys Ltd
₹1,481.40
10.80
(0.73%)
DMART
Avenue Supermarts Ltd
₹4,215.00
17.75
(0.42%)
PIDILITIND
Pidilite Industries Ltd
₹2,954.35
96.65
(3.38%)
HDFCBANK
HDFC Bank Ltd
₹1,994.90
17.35
(-0.86%)
View All
Top Gainers
SARDAEN
Sarda Energy
439.30
85.00
(19.35%)
MIRZAINT
Mirza Internatio
33.42
4.76
(14.24%)
DTL
Diensten Tech
140.00
17.80
(12.71%)
PENINLAND
Peninsula Land
34.29
4.32
(12.60%)
TAINWALCHM
Tainwala Chem.
232.15
28.97
(12.48%)
IDEALTECHO
Ideal Technopl.
178.00
19.00
(10.67%)
EUROBOND
Euro Panel
204.28
20.51
(10.04%)
View All
Top Losers
ZIMLAB
Zim Laboratories
107.43
-21.49
(-20.00%)
PSPPROJECT
PSP Projects
757.70
-83.70
(-11.05%)
BHAGERIA
Bhageria Indust.
200.69
-20.65
(-10.29%)
ADVENZYMES
Advanced Enzyme
360.35
-31.20
(-8.66%)
VISHNU
Vishnu Chemicals
540.45
-46.45
(-8.59%)
EPIGRAL
Epigral
1956.30
-163.40
(-8.35%)
UTKARSHBNK
Utkarsh Small F.
21.91
-1.73
(-7.90%)
View All
Open Free Demat Account!
Join our 3 Cr+ happy customers
+91
4.4 Cr+
DOWNLOADS
Enjoy ₹0 Account Opening Charges
Open Free Demat Account!
₹0 brokerage for first 30 days*
Join our 3 Cr+ happy customers
+91
Enjoy Free Equity Delivery for Lifetime
Open 100% free* demat & trading A/C now!
Select current city
Open My Account
×
Minimal Brokerage Charges
₹0 brokerage on stock investments and flat ₹0 AMC for first year.
ARQ Prime
Make smart decisions with ARQ prime, a rule based investment engine
Technology Enabled
Trade or invest anywhere, anytime with our App or web platforms
Fast-track your investing journey with Us,  India’s fastest growing fintech company
+91
By proceeding, I agree to
T&C
and
Privacy Policy
.
Do you already have an account?
Login
Open an Account
×
Initializing Search...
Copyright - All rights reserved
We collect, retain, and use your contact information for legitimate business purposes only, to contact you and to provide you information & latest updates regarding our products & services.
We do not sell or rent your contact information to third parties.
Please note that by submitting the above mentioned details, you are authorizing us to Call/SMS you even though you may be registered under DND. We shall Call/SMS you for a period of 12 months.
Brokerage will not exceed SEBI prescribed limits
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Any Grievances related the aforesaid brokerage scheme will not be entertained on exchange platform.